# Character
In programming, especially in the context of languages like C# or C#, a char (short for "character") is a data type used to represent a single character. Characters can include letters, digits, punctuation marks, whitespace characters (such as spaces and tabs), and special characters like newline characters.

In C# and C#, the char data type is a 16-bit unsigned integer that represents Unicode characters. It can store any character from the Unicode character set, which includes characters from various languages and scripts, as well as symbols and emojis.

**Creating a Character object:**
- char ch='a';

The char data type in C# represents a single Unicode character. It's a value type and not an object, so it doesn't have methods like in C#. However, C# provides static methods in the char struct to perform similar operations:

<!-- The Character class is immutable like String class i.e once it’s object is created, it cannot be changed. -->
1. **Character.isDigit('A')** => return true if given char is a number
2. **Character.isLetter('A')** => return true if given char is a Letter
3. **Character.isWhitespace('A')** => return true if given char is a whiteSpace
4. **Character.isUpperCase('A')** => return true if given char is in uppercase
5. **Character.isLowerCase('A')** => return true if given char is in lowercse
6. **Character.toUpperCase('a')** => return given char in uppercase
7. **Character.toLowerCase('A')** => return given char in lowercase
8. **Character.toString('x')** => return given char in string


char.IsDigit('A'): Returns true if the given character is a digit.
char.IsLetter('A'): Returns true if the given character is a letter.
char.IsWhiteSpace('A'): Returns true if the given character is a white space.
char.IsUpper('A'): Returns true if the given character is uppercase.
char.IsLower('A'): Returns true if the given character is lowercase.
char.ToUpper('a'): Returns the uppercase equivalent of the given character.
char.ToLower('A'): Returns the lowercase equivalent of the given character.
char.ToString('x'): Converts the given character to its string representation.

```c#
char myChar = 'A';

bool isDigit = char.IsDigit(myChar); // false
bool isLetter = char.IsLetter(myChar); // true
bool isWhiteSpace = char.IsWhiteSpace(myChar); // false
bool isUpper = char.IsUpper(myChar); // true
bool isLower = char.IsLower(myChar); // false

char upperChar = char.ToUpper(myChar); // 'A'
char lowerChar = char.ToLower(myChar); // 'a'

string charString = myChar.ToString(); // "A"
```

# ASCII value
ASCII is an acronym that stands for American Standard Code for Information Interchange. In ASCII, a specific numerical value is given to different characters and symbols

**There are 3 ways to print ASCII value or code of a specific character**

1. Using brute force Method 
 `simply assign the character to a new variable of integer type.`
```c#
using System;

class Program
{
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        char ch = 'A';
        int ascii = (int)ch;
        Console.WriteLine("The ASCII value is " + ascii);
    }
}

```

2. Using the type-casting Method
`Type-casting in C# is a way to cast a variable into another datatype which means holding a value of another datatype occupying lesser bytes.`
```c#
using System;

class Program
{
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        char ch = 'A';
        Console.WriteLine("The ASCII value is " + (int)ch);
    }
}
```

3. Using the format specifier Method
`We have stored the value of the given character inside a formal specifier by specifying the character to be an int. Hence, the ASCII value of that character is stored inside the format specifier.`
```C#
using System;

class Program
{
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        char character = 'A';
        string formatSpecifier = $"{(int)character}";
        Console.WriteLine("The ASCII value is " + formatSpecifier);
    }
}

```

**ASCII Value Of**
**A-Z** =>(65-90)
**a-z** =>(97-122)
**0-9** =>(48-57)

