### Data vs Information
Data is a collection of row facts Where Information is processed organized data.

# Database
A database is an organized collection of data, so that it can be easily accessed and managed. Ex:-
`MySQL, Sybase, Oracle, MongoDB, Informix, PostgreSQL, SQL Server, etc.`

### Type of database

**1. Relational Database (RDBMS)**
Relational database stored data in the form of relations. Ex:- `The RDBMS database uses tables to store data.`


**2. Cloud Database**
A cloud database is runs on a cloud computing platform.

**3. NoSQL Database**
NoSQL database doesn't use tables for storing data. `NoSQL Database is used to refer a non-SQL or non relational database.`

**Ex-** MongoDB, CouchDB, Cloudant

# DBMS
Database management System is used to store and retrieve the database. **EX:-** Oracle, MySQL, etc.

### SQL
SQL stands for Structured Query Language. It is used to access and manipulate databases.

### What Can SQL do?
SQL can execute queries against a database, retrieve data, insert records, update records, delete records from a database and many more.

### MySQL
MySQL is a relational dDBMS based on the Structured Query Language.

### LIMIT
The LIMIT clause is used to specify the number of records to return.

```sql
SELECT * FROM Customers LIMIT 3; 
-- Show only 3 records.
```

## Having
The HAVING clause was added to SQL because the WHERE keyword cannot be used with aggregate functions.

```sql
SELECT COUNT(CustomerID), Country
FROM Customers GROUP BY Country
HAVING COUNT(CustomerID) > 5;
```
**Change user password**

```sql
UPDATE user SET password = 'jtp12345' WHERE user = 'peter';
```

### How many column can insert at a time?
The hard limit is 4096 columns per table, with a maximum row size of 65,535 bytes

### What is `Delimeter`
### Use of `Describe`, `Show` & `USE`


# Future Update💡
- Regular Expration in Mysql (yahoo baba)
- injection in mysql
- schemas and normal form in mysql
- ENUM
- SET
- convert 
- extract
- information_Schema
- row_number, over(), Count(*) over
- limit ofset