Database language can be used to read, store and update the data in database.

# 1. DDL (Data Definition language)
DDL commands are used to create and modify database schema objects like tables, views, indexes, and databases.

## 1.1 CREATE Command
Used to create databases, tables, triggers and other database objects.

**Create Database**
```sql
CREATE DATABASE databasename;
```

**Create Table**
```sql
CREATE TABLE table_name (
    column1 datatype,
    column2 datatype
);
```

**Create View**
```sql
CREATE VIEW view_name AS
SELECT column1, column2, ...
FROM table_name
WHERE condition;
```

**Create Index**

```sql
CREATE INDEX index_name on table_name(column_name);
```

## 1.2 DROP Command
DROP is used to delete whole structure of a table, view or index from the database.

**Drop Database**
```sql
DROP DATABASE databasename;
```

**Drop Table**
```sql
DROP TABLE table_name;
```

**Drop Index**
```sql
DROP INDEX index_name ON table_name;
```

**Drop View**
```sql
DROP VIEW view_name;
```

## 1.3 ALTER Command
ALTER is used to changes or modifies the existing structure of the table or database.

We can also add and drop constraints of the table using the ALTER command.

**Add Column in existing Table**
```sql
ALTER TABLE table_name
ADD column_name datatype;
```

**Drop Column from table**
```sql
ALTER TABLE table_name
DROP COLUMN column_name;
```

**Modify column**
To change the data type of a column in a table

```sql
ALTER TABLE table_name
MODIFY COLUMN column_name datatype;
```

## 1.4 TRUNCATE Command
TRUNCATE is used to deletes all row like delete, but it has no option to delete specific rows and not rollback function available.
`This is fast because it does'nt create log file`

```sql
TRUNCATE TABLE table_name;
```
If a Column is Auto Increment it start counting from 0 after TRUNCATE. `But in delete it start from last count`

## 1.5 RENAME Command

RENAME is used to change the name of the database table.

**Rename a Database**
You can't Rename Directly a database in MySql. `But you can copy it in a new Database.`

**Rename a Table**
```sql
RENAME TABLE old_table_name TO new_name;
or
RENAME TABLE old_table1 TO new_table1,
   old_table2 TO new_table2,
   old_table3 TO new_table3;
```

**Rename a Column**
```sql
ALTER TABLE t11
CHANGE COLUMN t1 t2 datatype;
```

# 2. DCL (Data Control Language)
- DCL is used to control user access in a database.
- Using DCL command, it allows or restricts the user from accessing data in database schema.

## 2.1 GRANT
GRANT command gives user's access privileges to the database.
This command allows specified users to perform specific tasks.

**SELECT:** Allows users to retrieve (read) data from a database table.

```sql
GRANT SELECT ON database_name.table_name TO 'username'@'hostname';
-- Specific table of a DB
```

```sql
GRANT SELECT ON database_name.* TO 'user_name'@'localhost';
-- All table of a DB
```

**INSERT:** Grants permission to add new rows of data to a database table.

**UPDATE:** Permits users to modify existing data within a table.

**DELETE:** Allows users to remove data from a table.

**CREATE:** Grants the ability to create new databases or tables.

**ALTER:** Permits the modification of existing tables, such as adding or deleting columns.

**DROP:** Grants permission to delete databases or tables.

**SHOW DATABASES:** Allows users to list available databases on the server.

**GRANT OPTION:** Allows a user to grant or revoke privileges to/from other users. This privilege is typically given to administrative users.

**ALL PRIVILEGES:** Grants all privileges for a specific database or table, including the ability to grant or revoke privileges for other users. It's a superuser privilege.

## 2.2 REVOKE
REVOKE command is used to cancel previously granted or denied permissions.
This command withdraw access privileges given with the GRANT command.
It takes back permissions from user.

**SELECT:** Denied users to retrieve (read) data from a database table.

```sql
REVOKE SELECT ON database_name.table_name
FROM 'username'@'hostname';
-- Specific table of a DB
```

```sql
REVOKE SELECT ON database_name.* TO 'user_name'@'localhost';
-- All table of a DB
```

# 3. DML(Data Manipulation Language)
DML commands are used to manipulate data stored in database tables. `We can easily access, store, modify, update and delete the existing records from the database using DML commands.`


## 3.1 INSERT Command
INSERT is data manipulation command in Structured Query Language, which allows users to insert data in database tables.

```sql
INSERT INTO table_name (column1, column2, column3, ...)
VALUES (value1, value2, value3, ...);
```

## 3.2 UPDATE Command
UPDATE allows users to update or modify the existing data in database tables.

```sql
UPDATE table_name
SET column1 = value1, column2 = value2, ...
WHERE condition;
```

## 3.4 DELETE Command
DELETE is users to remove single or multiple existing records from the database tables.

```sql
DELETE FROM table_name;
```

# 4. TCL(Transaction Control Language)

TCL commands is help the user manage the transactions that take place in a database. COMMIT and ROLLBACK Command only apply on UPDATE, DELETE and INSERT commands.

## 4.1 COMMIT
COMMIT is Used to save data. If you run COMMIT command after some changes it can't be ROLLBACK.

```sql
COMMIT;
```

## 4.2 SAVEPOINT
SAVEPOINT is a special mark inside a transaction that is usefull to rollback by marks.

```sql
SAVEPOINT umesh;
```
## 4.3 ROLLBACK
ROLLBACK is used to undo all data whose not commited. (Only UPDATE, DELETE and INSERT)

```sql
ROLLBACK;           
-- revert all transaction whose not commited.

ROLLBACK to umesh;
-- Only revert transaction upto umesh. 
```

# 5. DQL (Data Query Language)

DQL is used to retrieve data from database.

## SELECT Command

SELECT is used to fetch data from one or more tables.

```sql
SELECT * FROM table_name;
```